---
title: "Introducing Aris: The publishing platform for the Post-PDF Era"
date: 2025-07-24
author: "Leo Torres"
description: "We're building the future of academic publishing: tools that make it easy to create, share, and preserve knowledge in formats designed for the web, not the printing press."
tags: ["announcement", "mission", "tools", "academic-publishing"]
---

# Introducing Aris: The publishing platform for the Post-PDF Era

*July 24, 2025 â€¢ Aris Team*

Academic publishing is broken.

Not in the dramatic, "everything must burn" sense, but in the quiet, everyday
frustrations that compound over time. We've all experienced the _death by a thousand
academic paper-cuts_. You've felt it too: squinting at PDFs on your phone, wasting time
searching for the correct email thread, watching valuable discussions disappear after
conferences end, seeing brilliant research locked away in static files that search
engines can barely understand, wincing at the dreaded "data and code available upon
request".

We've all adapted to these limitations because, well, this is just how scholarly
communication works. But it doesn't have to be.

## What We're Building

**Aris is infrastructure for the post-PDF era**. We're not trying to replace everything
overnight, instead we're building bridges from where academic publishing is today to
where it needs to be tomorrow.

Our first two tools embody this philosophy:

<span style="color: #FF6B6B; font-weight: bold;">Preview Press</span> is a modern
preprint server designed for web-native research. Instead of forcing you to squeeze
everything into PDF constraints, it accepts documents in any HTML format and gives them
permanent URLs, version tracking, and community discussions. Your research can finally
be as dynamic and interactive as your ideas.

<span style="color: #4A90E2; font-weight: bold;">RSM Studio</span> is a collaborative
editor for RSM (Readable Science Markup), a format that preserves the meaning of your
content while enabling beautiful presentation across all devices. Write once, read
everywhere, from mobile phones to printed pages, with the semantic structure intact.

## Why This Matters

The current state of academic publishing creates artificial barriers between researchers
and their work. Consider the last time you tried to reference a specific figure from a
PDF on your phone or tablet, or attempted to trace a citation through multiple
documents. These aren't minor inconveniences. They're fundamental friction points that
slow down the pace of discovery.

Meanwhile, the rest of the digital world has moved toward interconnected, searchable,
accessible content. Social media platforms enable global conversations in real-time.
News websites adapt their layouts to any screen size. Even personal blogs have better
discovery mechanisms than most academic papers.

But academic publishing remains stuck in 1993, when the PDF was revolutionary for
ensuring consistent printing and LaTeX provided unmatched typesetting control. Three
decades later, we're still optimizing for paper in a pixel world, treating the web as a
poor substitute for print rather than embracing its native capabilities.

Both LaTeX and PDF are just as powerful (in fact, even more powerful) as they were in
1993, to be sure. However, they were both designed to produce or emulate print formats,
and it is the reality of many researchers today that they no longer engage with research
in print paper.

The tools of knowledge should be as thoughtful as the knowledge itself. LaTeX and PDF
realized this aspiration for paper; it is time to build the next generation of tools for
pixels.

## Our Principles

Everything we build stands on four foundational principles:

**Universal**: Works on any device, for any user, in any context. No barriers to access,
no platform lock-ins. Portable, personalizable, accessible.

This means a document published through Aris' tools is equally readable on any
reasonably modern device, with or without assistive technology. It means documents work
without internet connectivity and don't require proprietary software or expensive
licenses, and are not gatekept behind predatory pay walls. True universality isn't just
about compatibility, it's about ensuring knowledge flows freely across all boundaries.

**Transparent**: Your research, your control. Everything is exportable, versionable, and
built on open standards.

When you create something with our tools, you own it completely. Your documents are
stored in open formats that any system can read. Every version is preserved with full
history. If Aris disappeared tomorrow, your work would remain accessible and portable.
We're building tools, not traps. This transparency extends to our code, our standards,
and our business model. We aspire to build a community around our tools, and eventually
seek ways to enact community governance and oversight.

**Interactive**: Research is conversation. Our tools enable dialogue, feedback, and
knowledge that builds over time.

Static documents kill conversations. Real research happens through questions,
challenges, refinements, and collaborative building. Our platforms make it easy to
comment on specific exerpts, suggest improvements to methodologies, or build upon
existing work via instant author-reader communication. Knowledge should accumulate and
evolve, not sit frozen in isolated files. Every publication becomes a starting point for
further discovery.

**Inviting**: Beautiful, effortless experiences that respect your time and let you focus
on what matters.

Good tools disappear into the background, letting your ideas take center stage. No
learning curves for basic tasks. No fighting with formatting when you should be writing.
No choosing between accessibility and aesthetics. We believe that academic tools should
be as polished and intuitive as the best consumer software, because researchers deserve
interfaces that match the sophistication of their thinking.

## A Human-First Approach

Most attempts to modernize academic publishing fall into two camps: either they try to
make PDFs slightly better (adding comments, annotations, or viewer improvements), or
they create entirely new closed systems that require wholesale adoption.

We're taking a third path: building human-first tools with web standards from the ground
up. This means starting with how researchers actually think, work, and collaborate, then
building technology that supports those natural workflows rather than forcing you to
adapt to the limitations of legacy formats.

## The Journey Ahead

We're starting with researchers who are already frustrated with the status quo: those
who've tried to make PDFs interactive, who've wished for better collaboration tools, who
believe that academic publishing can and should work better in the age of ubiquitous
computing. Those who are experimenting with [Typst](https://typst.app/),
[Quarto](https://quarto.org/), [Jupyter Book](https://jupyterbook.org/),
[Observable](https://observablehq.com/), [Authorea](https://www.authorea.com/),
[Curvenote](https://curvenote.com/), [Zettlr](https://www.zettlr.com/),
[Scispace](https://typeset.io/), and even more interactive scientific communication
tools such as [Manim](https://www.manim.community/) videos, [D3.js](https://d3js.org/)
visualizations, [Plotly](https://plotly.com/) interactive figures,
[p5.js](https://p5js.org/) creative coding, insightful TikToks, Discord communities,
Clubhouse discussions, and even Twitch streams.

This is just the beginning. Over the coming months, we'll be sharing our thinking on
web-native publishing, demonstrating new features, and building in public. We'll explore
what it means to preserve knowledge for the long term, how to make research truly
accessible, and why the future of academic communication is already here but just not
evenly distributed yet.

## A Vision Worth Pursuing

Yes, Aris's vision is ambitious and sweeping. It needs to be, for science deserves no less.

We're not just building better tools. We're reimagining how human knowledge is created,
shared, and preserved. That's not a small undertaking, and we don't pretend otherwise.
But the alternative is accepting that the most important academic discussions of our
time will continue to happen in formats optimized for print rather than the
digital-first world where most research is now consumed.

Science has always been about pushing boundaries, asking "what if," and refusing to
accept that things must stay as they are. Why should the tools of science be any
different?

## Join Us

The post-PDF era isn't a distant future. It's a choice we can make today. Every time we
prioritize accessibility over visual consistency, collaboration over control, open
standards over proprietary formats, we're building that future.

If you're ready to move beyond the limitations of print-era thinking, we'd love to have
you join us. Try [<span style="color: #FF6B6B; font-weight: bold;">Preview
Press</span>](https://prev.press) for your next preprint. Experiment with [<span
style="color: #4A90E2; font-weight: bold;">RSM Studio</span>](https://rsm.studio) for
collaborative writing. Join our [<span style="font-weight: bold;">Zulip
Community</span>](https://aris-pub.zulipchat.com/) to discuss the future of academic
publishing. Share your thoughts on what academic publishing should become.

<div style="text-align: center; margin: 4rem 0;">
  <img src="/images/logos/aris-logo-64.svg" alt="Aris" style="width: 64px; height: 64px; opacity: 0.4;" />
</div>

*Join Aris in reimagining how researchers create, share, and preserve knowledge with
web-native, human-first tools.*
